English language and style
( ) Extensive editing of English language and style required
( ) Moderate English changes required
(x) English language and style are fine/minor spell check required
( ) I don't feel qualified to judge about the English language and style

Yes 	Can be improved 	Must be improved 	Not applicable
Does the introduction provide sufficient background and include all relevant references?
	( ) 	( ) 	(x) 	( )
Is the research design appropriate?
	( ) 	(x) 	( ) 	( )
Are the methods adequately described?
	( ) 	( ) 	(x) 	( )
Are the results clearly presented?
	( ) 	( ) 	(x) 	( )
Are the conclusions supported by the results?
	( ) 	( ) 	(x) 	( )

Comments and Suggestions for Authors

The author picks up P.F. Strawson’s paper “Freedom and Resentment”
to discuss moral determinism, moral responsibility and the role of
reactive attitudes in morality. Strawson, in his/her view,
presents a view of moral responsibility which gives pride of place
to peoples reactive attitudes. The author wants to articulate a
critique of this view, as s/he finds it in the work of what he
calls “two continental thinkers”: Michel Foucault and Franz Kafka.
S/he does not, however, side with either party, but leaves the
issue in a kind of aporia at the end.

The paper touches upon many interesting issues, but it remains as
it stands, textually too dense, and conceptually too sprouting to
do the job envisioned by the author in the abstract. There is also
substantial mismatch between what the author promises to do and
what s/he says in the conclusion, leaving a reader somewhat
confused concerning the point of the paper. There are also
interpretive problems and unclarities concerning the texts and
authors engaged. Thus, I do not see the manuscript as ready for
publication, although something interesting may well come out of
this work at a later stage.

Given that Strawson’s paper is the backbone of the article, it
would be helpful for the reader if the author’s philosophical
interest in this paper would be made more overt, and its potential
contribution or relevance to contemporary philosophy more concise.
Why read this paper today: what does it give us, which
contemporary debates could or should it link to? What are the
central issues in the author´s view: determinism, moral
responsibility/agency, reactive attitudes in morality,
modernity/modern moral philosophy? It seems like the author has
not quite made up his mind yet.

I am in principle sympathetic to the authors manner of engaging
Kafka as a philosopher. The presentation of Kafka’s “view” is
however too brief to be helpful here. A literary work or set of
works of Kafka’s kind does not, as the author is aware, yield a
philosophical position without a certain interpretive effort on
the philosophical readers part. This particular reading (of the
literary text/texts) should be made explicit, and properly fleshed
out in the paper, to bring out an engaging and persuasive picture
of the position attributed to Kafka or his work. Such a reading
would also facilitate the concise formulation of what the author
sees as “Kafkas position”, and how it stands in relation to
Strawson (and Foucault).

There is even less interpretive discussion of Foucault in the
text, with the consequence that Foucault’s “position” (to be
pitted against Strawson) remains somewhat elusive. We learn
however that he is supposed to represent a “pessimistic” form of
moral determinism, that he holds that “modernity has already
largely progressed to a state where both individuals and
collectives no longer meaningfully identify as moral agents” (p.
3), that the aim of a genealogical study of a concept (in
Foucault’s style) would be its collapse (p. 5), that he studies
knowledge and sex/gender “to undermine the intrinsic power of
these concepts to motivate behavior” (p. 5). As a description of
Foucault’s work, I find these remarks off key, though in line with
a certain misguided popular image of his work. Foucault is not in
the business of showing the impossibility of moral agency or
collapsing concepts, but rather meticulously tracing the
historical coming to be of concepts, institutions, practices, and
forms of agency, which seem to us inevitable (and thus universal).
The question is: could this more subtle Foucault have a role in
the debate with Strawson, and if he could, what would that role
be?


