From sediomyle@gmail.com Sun Sep 16 16:56:57 2018
Date: Sun, 16 Sep 2018 09:56:55 -0700 (PDT)
From: Ethical Theory and Moral Practice <em@editorialmanager.com>
To: Stefan Lukits <sediomyle@gmail.com>
Subject: Your Submission ETTA-D-18-00125
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 8bit
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
Status: RO
X-Status: F

Dear Dr. Lukits,

We have received the reports from our advisors on your manuscript ETTA-D-18-00125 "Moral Necessity and the Implementation of Modernity".

With regret, I must inform you that, based on the advice received, the Editors have decided that your manuscript cannot be accepted for publication in Ethical Theory and Moral Practice.
Below, please find the comments for your perusal.

YOU ARE KINDLY REQUESTED TO ALSO CHECK THE WEBSITE FOR POSSIBLE REVIEWER ATTACHMENTS.

I would like to thank you very much for forwarding your manuscript to us for consideration and wish you every success in finding an alternative place of publication.

With kind regards,
Journals Editorial Office
Springer






Comments for the Author:

Thank you for submitting to ETMP.  Having received two conflicting assessments of your paper, we invited a third reviewer to comment. We are sorry to say that, in light of the reports and recommendations received, we are unable to invite resubmission. We hope the comments below are useful to you, however, and wish you all the best in your future work. ETMP.

Reviewer #1: The paper is not an argument for a clearly stated philosophical conclusion. The discussion of Kafka (with some mention of Nietzsche and Foucault) is claimed to identify a weakness in P. F. Strawson's argument concerning reactive attitudes and to illustrate the value of bringing European literary treatments of moral philosophy into dialogue with analytic philosophy. Unfortunately, the paper does not substantiate these claims. It does not articulate the purported weakness in Strawson's argument sufficiently to show that there really is a problem here, let alone to make a case that Strawson must be wrong about this. The description of Kafka's position on moral responsibility is simply asserted rather than substantiated by critical textual analysis. As a result of these two shortcomings, the paper does not demonstrate any value in bringing European literary treatments of moral philosophy into dialogue with analytic philosophy.

Reviewer #2: Very subtle, original and well argued interplay between ethical theory and literature, at the crossroad between the analytic and continental traditions. The paper is very insightful, I would only give the optional suggestion to make a longer and slower proceeding section on Kafka's specific examples. As it is, while every point made there is clear, the section reads a little bit like a rapid fire list, which undermines the sense of philosophical power possessed by literature. More space and a slower pace would both help the persuasive force of literature to sink in.

Reviewer #3: The author shows a wide understanding of key figures in both the 'continental' and 'analytic' traditions. The paper points towards some very interesting aspects of both Kafka's literary work and Foucault's genealogical approach. However, the line of argument, that something about continental/analytic intersections tells us something about the tensions between universalism and particularism in morality, is simply not clear or persuasive enough. Part of the problem is that there is just too much going on - there is some brief discussion of Strawson, and then Habermas pops up for a little bit, then we get a bit on Nietzsche and on Hume, followed by some Heidegger, and so it goes on. It is very confusing, with everything treated too superficially and quickly to really understand what the author is getting at. The impression is of a scattershot of thoughts about various figures, with little sense of a coherent, logical progression throughout the paper. Further,
through treating so many things so quickly, the author is presuming quite a lot of background knowledge on the part of the reader that I don't think it is safe to assume, even with a reasonably specialised audience. As an obvious example, Kafka's short story 'The Great Wall of China' is supposed to tell us something about a "yearning" related to "a sense of collapse for moral agency in cultural expressions of modernity", but the author gives us very few details about the plot and just how it connects to the argument of the paper. Generally speaking, various key claims are not explained in anywhere near enough detail throughout, and some sentences just don't make sense - e.g. on page 6, "For Strawson this is a simple fact of human nature, one that may within the constraint that it is not for metaphysical review be open to scientific inquiry". I recommend rejecting the paper as I think it requires such major revisions that anything publishable out of this would be an entirely
different paper. For one thing, it would be much more streamlined, focusing on fewer figures (perhaps just discussing Foucault and Kafka, as I did not find the contrast with 'analytic' figures such as Strawson particularly illuminating), and make rather more limited claims. There are kinds of 'grand narrative' claims being made here that are unsuitable, in my view, for a journal article, and in fact would be more suited to a monograph. Also, more recent literature on these figures and debates are only ever hinted at, and not discussed in any detail. As such, it is not clear how this paper is supposed to link into debates in the literature. Simply put, the writer does not do enough to put a clear thesis to us, and to persuade the reader that they are saying something that is worth saying.


The Editorial Manager is at: https://etta.editorialmanager.com/


Recipients of this email are registered users for this journal. In line with data privacy directives, we will remove your personal information from the journal's database upon your request. Where the journal's database is shared with companion journals, this will be all-inclusive. Database sharing is indicated at the journal's homepage. At removal, your personal identifiers are hashed and your account is deactivated. We will be unable to reinstate your account history. The history of past manuscript progress is retained scholarly record, and may only be retrieved post-archiving, for official investigation, in line with COPE practices. Once your account is removed, you are no longer known to the journal. As such, it will be possible for journal Editors to re-register you anew, if your contact details and expertise are found in the public record. You will always be notified of a (re)registration, prior to invitation to participate.  If you prefer that the journal persistently
recalls your wish to not be contacted for invitations to participate, please indicate this. This may be accommodated as a service provision, but necessitates that we maintain a record of your registration details and preference for no-contact. Publication office:
PublicationOfficeSPI@springernature.com


If you would like your personal information to be removed from the database, please contact the publication office.

