English language and style
( ) Extensive editing of English language and style required
( ) Moderate English changes required
(x) English language and style are fine/minor spell check required
( ) I don't feel qualified to judge about the English language and style

Yes 	Can be improved 	Must be improved 	Not applicable
Does the introduction provide sufficient background and include all relevant references?
	( ) 	( ) 	(x) 	( )
Is the research design appropriate?
	( ) 	( ) 	(x) 	( )
Are the methods adequately described?
	( ) 	( ) 	(x) 	( )
Are the results clearly presented?
	( ) 	(x) 	( ) 	( )
Are the conclusions supported by the results?
	( ) 	(x) 	( ) 	( )

Comments and Suggestions for Authors

This paper contains some very interesting ideas that are worth
pursuing however it all needs to be more clearly and explicitly
worked out. Motivate, clarify, and defend what is being done at
each stage of discussion: why, and how that part of the discussion
relates to the overall argument. Much more logical sign-posting
needed throughout. The Humanities journal has no word limit.
Condensing the discussion into a mere 8 pages results in some loss
of intelligibility and accuracy. Key or pivotal arguments and
explanations need more detailed exposition and interpretation even
if this lengthens the paper.

‘Analytic’ means ‘true by virtue of meaning’. The philosophical
tradition should be referred to as ‘analytical philosophy’. Some
specification should be given of its core ideas or
commitments/methods.

The paper claims to offer criticism of analytical philosopher
Strawson by continental-type thinkers who nevertheless use
concepts of moral responsibility ‘similar to’ those in analytical
philosophy. This is very vague though initially given the meaning:
moral responsibility as constitutively linked to rationality and
epistemological possibilities. The Strawson argument seems to be
that moral responsibility will necessarily remain an essential
concept for us regardless of high-level moral theory affecting the
epistemological status of the basis of reactive attitudes because
interpersonal reactive attitudes are and always will be
psychologically inescapably necessary for meaningful human life
and personhood. This Strawsonian version of
‘de-transcendentalization’ of morality – which gives up
objectivity and makes subjective reactive attitudes constitutive
of moral responsibility - is not indicative of most present-day
analytical moral philosophers’ views. Many would distinguish
morality, moral judgments, and moral responsibility (i.e. what it
is to be morally responsible) from reactive attitudes of praise
and blame and still defend on the objectivity in some sense of
moral judgments.

In any case, it needs to be more clearly explained and tracked
throughout the paper what is being discussed. The Introduction’s
two opposing concepts need to be more fully explicated and then
explicitly foreshadow to what extent either concept is followed
through, plays a critical role, or is integrated into subsequent
discussion. Rather than just multiplying ‘contrasts’,
simplification and clarification are required. The target of
discussion seems to keep shifting in different contexts of
discussion: moral judgments, fundamental moral commitments, moral
responsibility, prescriptive morality, what people take themselves
to be doing when they hold themselves or others to be morally
responsible, reactive attitudes, guilt, moral value. Analytical
philosophy would demand much more rigorous and clear conceptual
analysis and progression of argument.

The other (continental) part of the argument insofar as it is
discernibly followed through seems to be that modernity’s
scientific/technological progress has resulted in epistemological
malaise affecting self-understanding, so that, contra Strawson,
individuals and communities no longer identify as moral agents.
(107-110) This is described as people being ‘alienated’ from the
‘attachment to moral responsibility’. Could this be re-stated to
make meaning clearer? The reference to Heidegger’s Dasien not
helpful, nor obscure remarks on guilt, in advancing the underlying
argument of the paper.

The ‘push-back’ against the assumption of the necessity of concept
of moral responsibility starts with Hume and the discussion is
intriguing but little more than suggestive, except to emphasise
how Nietzche (suddenly introduced into the picture) and Foucault
go further down Hume’s track by, unlike Hume, cutting loose from
the idea of necessity. Foucault’s genealogical accounts are seen
as intended to undermine the ‘intrinsic power’ of concepts like
morality. Key ideas here are of deception and ‘diffusion’ and
ultimately ‘psychological pathology’. (240-246) None of these
ideas are fully worked out nor is it shown sufficiently what this
part of the discussion aims to achieve. Instead there is a leap
back to Kafka’s literature (265-268) viewed as anticipating many
of Foucualt’s radical conclusion that ‘The enlightenment project
of characterizing human life as guided by reason and the
transparency of the self and nature to the third-person gaze of
the human mind has failed’. A rush of references is made to
Kafka’s novels where ‘objects vanish’; ‘hermeneutics becomes
operative’ on “being” without a text’; there is ‘no sovereign
chooser of moral value’; ‘perpetrator-subjects vanish in favour of
bureaucratic concealment’; ‘moral responsibility collapses because
there is for it no epistemological access to what the relevant
causal relationships are’… To the analytical philosopher these are
merely interestingly suggestive words – not backed up by strong
argument. The idea that the concept moral responsibility in
contemporary life has collapsed requires detailed strong argument.
(It is also the case that Enlightenment philosopher Immanuel Kant
certainly did NOT think the self or its motivations (nor all the
laws of nature) were ‘transparent’ to our minds, but that did not
in any way undermine his concept of morality or moral
responsibility.)

The conclusion seems to introduce at the last minute constructions
that could have been helpful if deployed earlier in the
discussion.
